---
title: The Riders and Hunters of Men
layout: post
notable: true
---

Posit that humans are just the reproductive organs of ideas, and our minds
little more than churning pools of interchanging notions. In short, standard
[meme theory][1]. We might be hosts whose carefully formulated egos are nothing
more than the emergent terrain of an ancient memetic battleground - one imagines
long wars between the myriad incarnations of fear and laziness for control of
our weary brains. The memes with the most dominant survival characteristics must
have long since evolved - likely candidates being caution, hope, and solidarity.
In this paradigm, the most prolific ideas are the hardiest survivors of
thousands of years of crossbreeding, their properties now the building blocks of
more complicated and fragile abstractions like justice, ambition, and
melancholy. The simplest ideas might occupy the lowest and most important rungs
of an intellectual ecosystem, akin to our humble meat-space phytoplankton.

However, how do ideas like self-destruction and asocialism breed, if their
character makes their owners shun reproducing? The answer may lie in the non-
intuitive fact that the reproduction of ideas need not be necessarily coupled
with the reproduction of humans. Have you found yourself slighted when cut off
on the highway, and thus spurred to cut another off in the same way? Some ideas
may predispose their hosts towards not mating, and yet be potent enough to
spread from individual to individual. Biologists have even identified similar
processes in the field, where individual bacteria swap genetic material without
reproducing. They call this act [Horizontal Gene Transfer][2], and it may be a
more widely applicable concept than they know.

More broadly, the reproduction criteria for a meme have little to do with the
host at all, beyond causing the host to express behaviors that cause others to
adopt that same meme. In Biology, in order for a lethal virus to survive, it
must assure that its genetic code is passed on before it destroys its host. This
seemingly ironclad Darwinian rule of the natural world need not apply to the
spread of ideas. Consider again that for ideas to be exchanged, humans do not
even have to meet face to face, or even be alive simultaneously. How many
suicides were born decades before they occurred, spread posthumously by another
carrier, like an oak desperately dropping acorns in the death throes of a fire.
The striking tragedy of a suicide is more than just sadness, but the idea’s
resilience in the minds of its witnesses. The kernel of the idea sits idly for
years in the intellectual field of a man’s mind until the fire of anger or
loneliness causes the undergrowth to clear enough for the seed of suicide to
sprout. Perhaps I erred, then, in suggesting that the most popular memes are
hardier than their less successful cousins.

What is the nature of our relationship with ideas? In some cases it seems
parasitic, especially with self-destructive ideas. The will to self-destruct
manifests itself at great personal cost to its host. Other ideas seem symbiotic,
like tribalism and love. Through expressing themselves in us, these ideas not
only heighten their own odds at survival, but bring us happiness and safety as
well. Still others seem hard to classify, like asceticism and other highly
abstract pursuits. It seems evident that humans and ideas need each other to
survive, but beyond that, their relationship is murky.

Perhaps the binary of parasitism and symbiosis is unhelpful. What if ideas owe
each other more allegiance than they owe us, and vice versa? We readily accept
the notion that the wolves who prey on the slowest of deer place a selection
pressure on the herd for speed. Might not some ideas prey on the most
susceptible of humans to ensure the fitness of the rest for peaceful occupation
by their memetic brethren? In that same vein, it could be said that humans
choose which ideas to pollinate, optimizing for ideas that appeal to ourselves
the most.

Ideas cooperating to produce a fitter human herd seems pat, but could the truth
be darker? What if our mostly Darwinian universe decreed that there must be
wolves to cull the weak human symbiotes and untenable ideas equally from the
herds of both humans and ideas. These wolves scent out their human prey, the
infirm harborers of unfit ideas, and stalk them until they fall. The complete
destruction of their prey has a threefold result: the thinning of the least fit
humans, the purging of divergent ideas remaining in those hosts, and the birth
of an ever so slightly deadlier predator from the wreckage of its victim.

[1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meme
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Horizontal_gene_transfer
